Welcome to the Parliament Bill Select Committee.
Uh, first up we are hearing from Derek, um, Gil.
Um, you've got five minutes.
Uh, be assured that members have read your submission.
Very good. I might add so over to you.
Sure. Thank you for the opportunity to present.
I'll be very brief 'cause five minutes is not long,
and I'd like to open up the questions.
So briefly introduce myself
and then explain, um, what, why,
why a bill, what, why a parliamentary budget office,
why now, and how would it work?
So my background is kind of a academic, I play in
that sweet spot zone
between reflective practice and research.
So I spent most of my career at the Treasury in Public
Service Commission with apel, the OECD.
Done quite a lot of work overseas as well.
But now these days I'm more a
researcher at Victorian University.
Um, and so why is, uh,
so my submission really focuses on the absence
and the parliament bill of an open
of an independent fiscal institution,
in particular parliamentary budget office.
So why is that important?
Well, you don't need to look at the American election
to realize that democracy is under threat
around the west.
In a way it hasn't been since the 1930s
and New Zealand is not exempt from that
if you look at almost all the data.
But we start from a higher base than the us which is a,
a risk of being a failing democracy.
If you look at all the data for New Zealand,
it's getting worse, but from a higher base.
So the second reason. So why now?
Well, as Chris Philson points out, you know,
this bill is a perfect opportunity
to move forward on an issue
that's been lacking from our arrangements.
Um, basically public management is a
race without a finish line.
Uh, New Zealand used to be a real world leader.
When I was at the PSCI used to have
to ration visitors from overseas.
'cause we had so many, they don't come knocking anymore
because we're not that good.
So we're a little bit like the
All Blacks we're going off the pace. Do you wanna ask?
Oh, yeah, yeah. Do you don't mind interrupting halfway.
We through submission. Let's call. It's only short.
So I'll make a quick question. You,
you just said failing democracy
and all the evidence pointing that way.
And what sort of evidence are you referring to?
Uh, um, so everything from party participation Mm-Hmm.
Electoral turnout, confidence and trust in government.
Just look across a range of data. Yeah.
Um, you know, lecture the stuff.
It's, it all, it's all, you know, as I say, we,
we are better than most other jurisdictions,
but it's all going in the wrong way.
And I should have added a second lead
to my question in this bill.
What do you see that's helping or hindering that?
So the key thing is about building more robust
institutions and what we lack at the moment as a robust set
of institutions in Parliament to work on the fiscal side.
We have a capable organization in the Treasury,
but it's very difficult for people outside
of the treasury to second guess that. Mm-Hmm.
Is this, this I, uh, the international budget partnership,
the IFI that you're referring
To? So the International Budget
Partnership is a, uh,
an international NGO Mm-Hmm.
So we do open budget surveys of 125 countries.
I was the open budget reviewer for New Zealand.
Given my background, it's not surprising. Yeah.
Um, and so we rank people's budgeting performance.
New Zealand has been number one.
We are no longer number one.
This rather than, um, just chat Mr. Chair. Mm-Hmm.
Um, we had looked, there was a brief fluttering time
where an independent financial institution was considered
by the finance expenditure committee.
Um, and I think everyone sees its merits.
This bill doesn't really go that far. Mm-Hmm.
Um, but I guess in terms of taking the
appropriations away from the throttle of the executive,
if you will, it would enable better financial
scrutiny simply by a better resourcing.
Right. Is that going some way to, towards the objective
that you're saying we should be achieving better scrutiny of
what treasury's basically doing?
So that you're under a
third part of what I was gonna introduce.
So what would it do? I think the most important thing
that it would do is cost opposition parties policies.
So at the moment, the public agencies have a, um,
could used to but no longer cost opposition policy.
So you think about the last election, with all due respect,
it was an unseemly debate, not about the policies,
but about the cost of the policies.
And voters should have been able
to say these policies have been robustly costly.
What is their merits
and what, what, so what parliamentarians lack at the moment
as an independent
and authoritative source advice to cost policies,
that's the most important thing it would do.
But it would also mean
that parliamentarians would have access to people
with the technical skills to help you
through the budget documents without
appearing to be arrogant.
Um, do you want to guess
what the most largest single moving item
in last year's budget was?
I define most people in this room define that the big,
the thing that changed the most in the budget.
I'm not playing your game. So New Zealand super end up
by $1.3 billion.
Right. Try and find that in the budget documents.
I can do it because I spent most
of my career in the Treasury, but
people can't find their way around them.
And that's why Parliament needs access
to independent expertise.
Say this, this bill was touching more on the bas,
but, um, what's happening
inside the Parliament budget office, not
so much costing policies.
And I take your point that we wouldn't be doing
that, uh, potentially.
And so a good idea,
but we're talking more about, you know, I OAS for
how much parliament as an institution is spending on having,
um, ways looking at side.
Is that, are you touching on
that in the submission? 'cause that's what
I was reading. No,
I'm saying that Parliament needs to have an office,
Right? That
can, so that if, um, an opposition wants
to say cost a different tax scale, they can go to an agency
who commission can commission that know how
to interpret the results and can give you robust advice
about the costs of that policy
and the uncertainty around those costings.
Otherwise, you go to what people do at the moment is go
to consulting firms and those
consulting firms make mistakes.
So, so what what you're looking for there is, um, a,
a trusted source of being able to scrutinize anything
in terms of the, the costing
of any policy at any time.
Because the time when it's most significant, of course,
is close to election time.
Yeah. They get, they get Say anything
And they get boiled into coalition agreements
and then the public service dutifully goes away
and says, oh, you thought it was $2 billion,
actually it's $3 billion.
And then the minister has to find a way out of the hole
because it's been built into a coalition agreement.
And having, uh, having, uh, given us that advice
of any idea what it would cost to, to run that,
I did a back of the envelope calculation.
Mm-Hmm. What On the treasury, ex treasury,
after all, I reckon you get away
under, well under 4 million.
And if you think about what we're spending on debt servicing
right now, which is $9.2 billion, uh,
4 million solar, That's a fraction.
That's a, that's a, that's a decimal point.
On a basis point,
it's rounding error relative to cost of debt servicing.
And an IFI means that your, uh,
treasury's fiscal forecast will be more credible
with the debt rating agencies, which means we should be able
to keep, keep the cost of debt financing low.
And we are gonna have high public debt all due respects
to the national members prison.
We're gonna have high public debt for quite a few years.
Well, thank you. Very good time.
Uh, we've now got, uh, bezel Walker on Zoom,
il.
Can you hear me? No. Well, we can't hear you.
We can't hear you at the moment.
That might be better. Ah, yes. Very good.
Um, welcome, welcome to the select committee.
Thank you for your submission.
You have, um, five minutes to speak to the committee. Kiara.
Thanks very much. Um,
and thank you for the opportunity to speak.
The purpose of the bill, as I, as I understand it,
coming from a business
and construction background is to make matters clearer,
we need to ensure that the MP's spending is not secret
or hidden by bureaucracy.
It must be transparent as is the Mysterial spending.
Furthermore, parliament unfortunately must
return to honesty.
Not anything other than, um, honest
as the judiciary phrases not misspoken
as some parliamentarian parliamentarians sp say,
but honest dialogue without any default
or intent as my appearance would've, um, demanded from us.
How can parliament suggest that Maki be celebrated
for ocean travel and navigation
by Maori finding New Zealand
and also that Maori are indigenous?
Either we all are indigenous
because all of our ancestors traveled,
or no one is indigenous.
This is my point or my concern point about
honesty and integrity.
Um, emanating from parliament
and the judiciary,
New Zealand is receiving judicial decisions
that are based on tikanga
and they'll defined in their logical akin
to partnership statements.
The parliamentary oath is to the reigning monarch controls
and is to be faithful and bear true allegiance.
According to law, the counterfactual is
to be erroneous and misleading.
And other entities can make law
because some people have different rights which make a
declaration or an acknowledgement
or an allegiance, obedience or adherence to another power.
A situation where a parliamentary seat has to be vacated.
Now, that's under the electoral Act 1993,
section 55, 1 B.
This leads to the appalling situation where this week
in response to media, our PM stunned the nation
by saying inter there isn't anything
I like about the democracy governing
for everyone by parliament.
There isn't anything I like about the full power
of government to make law in the best interests
of everyone in accordance with the rule of law and a free
and democratic society.
Society staggeringly.
And furthermore, the PM doesn't like everyone being equal
before the law and everyone being entitled without
discrimination to the equal protection of the law
and the equal enjoyment of the same fundamental rights.
It is incomprehensible
that the PM states this as leader of the leading
national party and that in the coalition,
and that there is nothing
about the treaty pin bulls bill he likes.
Now I realize, um, what of, what of order?
Excuse point of order, Mr.
Chair, there's, we've got a point of order. Uh,
We are discussing the Parliament bill,
the submission is on the Parliament Bill.
Um, this, uh, matter
that the submitter is presenting
has no relevance to the bill.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, thank you for that point of order.
I won't penalize any time.
Um, but I will tell you you've got two, uh,
less than two minutes left.
Uh, but this is about the parliament bill, not
treaty principles bill.
I realize it's about the Parliament Bill, um, Mr.
Chairman. But the point I brought up in my submission
and in my statements here now is about
honesty and integrity.
And if you go through my, my original submission,
that is what it's about.
And, and you are the, you are the, the, uh, committee.
But I am a, a, um, a member of, of,
of the community.
And this situation we we're finding ourselves in is
anything other than honest.
And, uh, I thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we've probably got time for one question.
If members have a question.
Does anyone, uh, thank you, basil.
The members don't have any questions, uh, for you.
Uh, your submission was very clear. Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. And now also by Zoom, we are going
to hear from Catherine ti.
Please go to Andrew, please.
Andrew. Andrew, how do you pronounce your surname?
Sorry, Kel Stone. Estone. Thank you, Lieutenant.
Uh, so I'm an adjunct senior research fellow
in the School of Government of Vic.
And, um, if you've seen my written submission, you'll note
that I've had previous positions developing an implementing
Freedom of Information Act in the UK
and working for the Ombudsman here on investigating
I complaints and processes in departments.
Um, just before turning
to the topics covered in my written submission, I want
to take a second to endorse what Jeffrey Palmer said last
week about needing more members of parliament
and the status of the parliamentary librarian.
Um, so New Zealand, as you know, has 123 mps, which,
uh, when you count by the 72 electorate,
MPS only has one MP per 75,000 people.
Uh, Ireland has the same population of us
and as well as an upper house of 60 senators,
they have a lower house of 160 mps.
So the Irish Constitution mandates the electoral commission
to review representation at regular intervals,
and it has to ensure that the
ratio doesn't exceed one MP per 30,000.
So in other words, you're talking about more than double the
representation ratio in Ireland, same population as us.
So if New Zealand had an equivalent number of mps,
we'd have about 180 mps or 57 more than today.
Why is this important? Because as Sir Jeffrey talked about,
MPS are short of time for scrutiny of bills like this
for doing select committee inquiries
and for, uh, parliamentary constituency casework.
Um, second point, sir Jeffrey made was that he thought,
and I agree with is that it's a mistake
to remove the statutory status
of the parliamentary librarian.
And one of the reasons I think is important for this is
that clause 124 of the bill, uh,
which concerns parliamentary services functions, says
that the funding for the library is according
to the determination of the CEO parliamentary service,
not according to what members say.
Now, of course, the budget for parliamentary service will be
according to what members determine.
And I'm sure they will give some steer for this.
But I think you might want to amend clause 124 so
that the library services definition,
what you want from the library is determined by members, not
by the chief executive of the Parliamentary service.
So I either preserve the statutory independence
and think about how you're gonna fund that function properly
or amend this part of the bill so
that you say members determine
what comes outta the parliamentary library.
And I wanted to provide members, uh, via the clerks, um,
some examples of the kind of briefings
that you see from the House of Commons Library.
There's one on police use of facial recognition technology,
pre-appointment hearings for things like ombudsman, uh,
orcas pillar two, and, uh, how to implement law,
law Law Commission recommendations.
So I'll, I'll give these to the clerk,
the members to have a look at.
Um, so the main function, main purpose of my submission was
to say the Official Information Act
should be extended to parliament.
It's not just me saying this.
The Stan Rogers review said this in 1999.
Two Law Commission reviews have said this in 2010 and 2012.
And part the OIA should be covering the office of the Clark,
uh, parliamentary Services office of the speaker,
the Parliamentary Commission, the Parliamentary Corporation.
And the reason for applying to the commission
and the corporation is that
although the bill effectively, that the,
the notes on the bill say
effectively parliamentary services will be holding this
information when you apply the OIA to Parliament,
what you do is you take outta the
definition of official information.
Information is held as an agent on behalf of somebody else.
So the office of the clerk, the speaker
and parliamentary services will be holding information
as agents for mps.
And you don't want that covered.
You want to cover the administration, the Bureaucracy
of Parliament, not
where its mps exercising parliamentary
proceedings and privilege.
But if the parliamentary services are holding information
for the commission and the corporation as an agent,
then you want to separately specify
the commission and the agent.
Um, the reason why you want
to bring the speaker in is in relation
to things like denying accreditation to a journalist
to cover a particular event of parliament.
Um, and that may or may not be privileged.
I'll let wiser heads behind me pin on
that when you, when you ask them.
But I think you can see there are examples such as policing
of, uh, parliamentary protest
where the speaker is gonna get involved in decisions
that have an effect outside the house and
therefore the public will want to know what's going on.
And not all of that will be covered
by parliamentary privilege.
Um, I've also said the OIA should extend to the Orman,
the Auditor General and the Parliamentary Council's office.
Those two were recommended by, uh, the Law Commission
and its 2012 review.
And in the uk all of the agencies
that I've listed are covered by its Freedom Information Act.
Indeed, you'll see from my written submission
that there are 24 Commonwealth countries
that apply the free their Freedom Information Law
to their legislature.
And there's another 77 countries around the world
who also apply their Freedom Information
law to their legislature.
So there's 101 countries apply their
official information act, their parliament.
We are not only outta date,
we're now a radical exception to the rest of the world.
Um, I'll leave a little time obviously
for members if they've got questions.
The rest of it to my written submission.
Anyone have questions?
Just, um, thank you.
Just over the OIA I'm happy to learn more.
Could you explain what do you think has been left out
by not having parliament, the commissioner,
all the agencies you've listed Sure.
Being open to it. Sure.
So, parliament's, our house, it's, you know,
the legitimacy of the,
of the legislature comes from the public.
So we should have a right to know, we do to to know
what is going on in this institution like any other state
institution because freedom
of information is not just a right of information
to the executive, it's a human right.
And in New Zealand, we apply to the courts,
we have the OAA applying to the administration of the courts
through Ministry of Justice, and the courts have their own
access to court documents rules.
Mm-Hmm. So applying the OIA to parliament recognizes
that the right to information, which is in section 14
of Bora and Article 19
of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights is a human right.
And human rights apply for all parts of the state.
What do we want to know? I want
to know about things like health and safety.
I want to know about the appalling state
of Parliament's website.
Terrible video provision. Right?
I mean, I challenge members to go
to parliament's pages on Vimeo
where the video is now hosted.
Yeah. And try
and find an oral submission by a particular person.
They're simply not indexed. Right.
So I want it to apply to that.
I want to know, for example, the, the,
the cabinet papers for this bill.
Say there was 2019 review of parliamentary security.
I'm not sure if that's been published.
Shouldn't I have a right to see that, given that the risk
for the parliamentary security was done in 2021
and we had pre both of them predate the protests in 2022,
shouldn't we be able to see, well,
what was parliament's internal
reflection on the security breakdown.
And so if you tried to apply for those right now,
you just get, it's entirely within the discretion
of the speaker and the office of the clerk.
There is a 2016 protocol,
but it's so buried that I hadn't even heard of it.
And I, you know, I I I know about this part of the law
and I've not even heard of this protocol.
So it's not exactly advertising itself to say
to the public here, if you want to ask us
for information about the running
of the house, here's the rules.
And in any case, you want refusals
to be independently arbitrated by the ombudsman
or an independent body.
Could a question from Dana?
Yeah. Thank you. Uh, Mr.
Chair, I just wondered if you had given any thought to, uh,
if your, uh,
proposal was, is that us? No, no, no.
Suspended and it's been
Recalled. Okay. Sorry.
Um, just making sure I don't have to move.
No, that's alright. Somewhere Else.
Um, um,
I'm used to MPS disappearing
for a division health. Yes, we do.
We do a good disappearing act.
Um, my question was, if your proposal as it stands was
to become part of the bill, have you given any thought
to the budgetary or resourcing component
of what that might require?
Uh, no, I haven't,
but I could provide the committee
with comparable costs from different legislatures.
It wouldn't be difficult. I mean,
given you've got 101 other countries where the OIA applies
to their parliament, I could certainly get those figures
from Ireland, from the uk, things like that.
Okay. I mean, Ireland's a good comparator
'cause it's the same population.
Mm-Hmm. Okay. Thank you. Okay.
Thank you for your, um, your time today.
So have we got m still got, um, let's go
to the remuneration authority.
K set aside, uh, 15 minutes for your
sufficient, uh, well thank you Mr.
Chairman. I, I don't intend to take 15 minutes, I promise.
Um, the, um, I I just want
to highlight the four points that we made.
We're, obviously, this is a very big bill.
We're only interested in the very small part of it,
although we think it's quite important,
of course it involves us.
Um, the, the first point, uh, we made is that,
um, the definition of an ordinary member, um, has got
quite convoluted in the, in the latest version of the bill.
The early version of Bill had nice, clear definition.
Um, and we feel like this definition
that's there at the moment is pretty much, um, asking us
to define what an ordinary member is.
And we think that's back to front.
We think parliament should tell us
what an ordinary member is, and then our job is to pay them.
So that's the, the point we made about that one.
Probably one of the most, um, pressing points we wanted
to make was about the, um, the determination
of the accommodation provisions.
Um, now, um, we think
that splitting them isn't a good idea.
Um, we, we did the last one of course, um,
last year before the election.
Um, and we had our analyst working pretty much full time
getting the information to make
that determination for a long period.
When you say splitting them, what splitting means? Sorry.
Um, well, some of it will be done by us
and some by the speaker.
So the way the bill puts it in is we would do the
ministerial ones and the the speaker would do the rest.
Um, now it's not really in our view
a remuneration matter anyway,
the a accommodate it's about running the business
of Parliament because this is just
how do mps get to do their job?
Um, we don't have a problem with us doing the travel for,
um, family members.
We think that should be done independently by us Mm-Hmm.
Um, but we just think there is potential for
sort of conflict between the two determinations.
If that's split. Now, we're not suggesting,
we're not looking for work, promise you
that we've got enough.
Um, so we don't mind whether it's the speaker
who we think should do it
because it's about running the business, uh,
or if it was decided that it needed
to be somewhat independent for us, we are just suggesting
that one agency should do it all.
Uh, as far as the accommodation is concerned, um, the, um,
other two points, um, one of them
relatively minor at the moment when our determination is
published, the chief executive
of parliamentary services required
to put it on their website
and let everybody know that it exists.
That's gone out of the bill. Uh, we'd prefer it.
We're still in there. We think from a transparency point
of view, it's not a big onus on parliamentary service
to continue to do it.
And we think it's a sensible thing to continue to do.
Uh, and our fourth point was there's a, uh,
person a mentioned in three clauses within the bill, um,
and Person A isn't defined.
Now, the reason that concerns us is that currently
and in this bill, um,
if there is a dispute about people's entitlements, uh,
parliamentary service, try and fix it.
Um, but if they can't, we become the arbiter.
Now, it doesn't happen very often in my
nine years on the authority.
We've done it once. Um,
but if it does happen, we, we'd like to know precisely
what person A means.
We are looking at it the moment
and we think it means a minister, a member
or an eligible candidate,
but you could read it to mean
that it's a member's spouse or something.
And, um, we don't think it's, it's helpful.
The person a reference sort
of works the way the bill's written.
We just would prefer, please,
if it was defined in the interpretation clause,
what it means then if we have
to arbitrate on a dispute at some point, um, we'll be able
to get it right rather than potentially getting it wrong.
Hmm. So those are the, the four points we made
and I'm really happy to answer any questions, Mr.
Chairman. And well, mate, is there any questions, just,
just, just to be clear, Jeff, and good to see it.
Um, so what you're saying is in terms of the determination,
uh, of accommodation arrangements,
you don't mind who does it?
Just one, one speaker,
just one age authority to do the whole lot.
Yep. If ministers and members That's right.
If, um, if, if the Parliament decides
that we should do it, well, we'll do it.
Uh, if the parliament decides
that the speaker should do it, then that's fine.
We won't, we, we we're not got a problem with that.
We just think the one piece of research
and analysis can result in the determination
of accommodation services for all people in this building.
And we just think that's much more sensible.
Sorry, just a follow up question.
Um, thank you for coming.
In terms of, at this stage, what is current the bill?
Is that one half be done by you
and one half be done by the speaker
and that, like you said, you know, the idea is
to have one person do all of it.
If it were a case where the status quo in the bill
as it states remains, which is two different people do it,
how would you envisage?
And it could be that you can't,
but how would you envisage the two areas sync up?
Uh, what we would do there is simply, um,
we worked really hard to, uh,
form a really good relationship
with the people in the speaker's office who were doing it
and try and make sure that nobody got it wrong.
Um, and, uh, you know, we, we do of course do some work
with parliamentary services, quite considerable amount
of interaction with them, uh,
on various matters in the speaker's office.
So, you know, it's not
as though there's gonna be a relationship problem.
We don't perceive that at all.
Um, and matter of fact, um, we,
we get some really good stuff done by, um, our interactions
with parliamentary service.
But, um, we just, we just think that two groups going out
and doing the research can come up with different answers
and that's going to make it more complicated.
Can I ask another question?
And this is in relation to the fact that it's, you know,
I'm really grateful for the fact
that you're going into such a detail as in the definition
of the person A in recommendation four,
but I wanna check with you within your remit
to do research on the broader context
of the determination itself.
Um, for example, uh, one of the things
that does come up in relation to person A,
these things like family members
and et cetera, as you know, that currently states that, um,
you know, the, the person who is eligible to be considered
as a family member is essentially a spouse.
Mm-Hmm. And then there's broadening of scope.
And you just mentioned before that you do research
around matching in terms of salaries and et cetera.
Right. Do you also do research that are non-financial?
I think do you do research on the current state of,
let's say, you know, family unit in Otero and New Zealand,
and how the, what is considered a family unit has shifted?
So spouse might not be the only determining factor of
what is constitution as a family, et cetera.
So do you do anything that's beyond
Within, within the confines of our capability?
We look at all that stuff when we do these. Cool.
We look really widely,
but our capability is, we're a very small agency.
We have two staff. Um, that's all we've ever had.
Um, and we have to get everything done with two staff
and three part-time members.
So how far we can delve into something like that sort is,
um, relatively limited, I would suggest. Yeah. Mm-Hmm.
Thank you. Okay. Uh, mine was really an observation
around the two agency thing,
around the accommodation and traveling, what have you.
Um, I guess you make the point that accommodation
and travel is operational for parliament.
I guess the challenge is that to the, um, public,
it looks like a, a benefit of being a parliamentarian
and in some senses, you know, it's Mm-Hmm.
Um, and I guess that's just my, I I guess I'm putting it
to you that in terms of make, having good distance
between parliamentarians
and any benefits they get by virtue of holding the position,
it would look to me like it's better for the RAM authorities
to do that than the speaker's office.
Mm-Hmm. Um, and,
and you know, that's perfectly a reasonable assumption.
If, if the independence factor, um, is to take precedence,
then we are happy to do it.
I mean, we currently do it. Yeah.
So, um, we are not, we're not unhappy about that.
Um, so, but our point was really just give it to one agency.
Yeah. Okay. That is, thanks. Are there any other questions?
Thank you. No, it was good.
Thank you very much, much for your Thanks very much.
Very clear recommendations. Yeah, thank you.
From people we know.
Okay. We're gonna go back to Catherine this year.
Needs to the problem
she's looking.
No, it's a shame. Well, um,
on my notes, she, do you think she might be
with Mary or We'll see her?
Yeah. Okay. Let's go to, uh, Dave Agnew.
We can hear from you. Speaker Dave, welcome.
Um, we've got, uh, five minutes with you. Excellent.
Um, research committee, uh, called Dave Agnew.
My name is Dave Agnew
and I am all things considered a Parliament tragic.
So it's here, goes around here with genuine delight, uh,
that I get to make a submission on this very
important piece of legislation.
Um, before I get to my own quite narrowly focused
submission, uh, I'd like to express my support for some
of the previous submissions.
Um, if you've read my submission, it'll come as no surprise.
I'd like to echo the PSA's, um, comments
that parliamentary service should own the, um, elector
and community office properties.
I think that just makes sense.
Um, I'll also add my voice to calls
to create a parliamentary budget office.
And at the very least, for PS Corporate
to be subject to the OAA.
Um, but I will leave more, uh, fulsome OAA suggestions
to the OAA experts.
Um, and finally, uh, I wanna echo the wisdom
of Sir Jeffrey Palmer.
Uh, especially regarding the number of mps.
mps, mps are overworked.
They do not have enough time to do the important work
of committees and their electorate work.
Um, and on that note, we'll turn to my submission.
Uh, so I recommend that the bill be amended
to introduce restrictions on party political branding
for electorate and community offices, uh, including
but not limited to party colors, logos, and slogans.
Uh, it is a reasonably simple practical change
that will strengthen parliament's, uh, reputation
and make it easier for constituents to engage, uh, at a time
where that is solely needed.
Uh, so quick, Tracey, of my written submission.
Um, elector mps, I think everyone can agree, are there
to represent their constituents, uh,
not their political parties and in,
but almost invariably,
the elector offices are decked out in party colors, logos,
branding, things like that.
Not all of them, but many of them.
Um, but they're staffed by parliament, funded by parliament,
and serve, uh, parliamentary purpose.
Um, but because they appear to be party aligned,
many constituents, um, who are entitled
to access support from their electorate, mps, uh,
feel a little uncomfortable
or sort of alienated from mps, uh, like
the concerns will be ignored or rejected
'cause they personally did not vote for that member.
Um, everyone I think with sort
of basic civics education understands
that their electorate MP is there to represent them.
Um, but if you didn't vote for them, there's sort
of a real genuine feeling
that they've just, they won't, they won't listen.
They, they don't, don't have your vote,
therefore they don't care about your issues, um,
which is clearly incorrect.
Right. Um,
so my written submission includes specific references,
so I'll just use this opportunity to turn to anecdotes.
Um, so most of my friends are politically engaged
to some extent or another, right?
Uh, but the lawyers
and the procedure, uh, proceduralists,
they all intimately understand how it works here.
Um, but the ones who sort
of aren't our fellow travelers maybe don't.
Um, so people who need support, like navigating changes
to elder care funding, but don't know where to start.
Um, people who need advocacy when engaging
with like complex mechanisms around state housing, um,
they just dunno who to talk to.
People struggling to navigate the immigration system to, um,
just let their partner stay with them
for another six months while they work
through various, uh, procedures.
Um, all of these things, people can go
to their electorate community office
and ask for support advocacy
to steer in the right direction.
Um, obviously I'm sort of all aligning specific details,
but these are all situations that I've been in
where I've told a friend, Hey,
just go talk to your local mp.
Uh, and most of those cases they say, I didn't vote for my,
for my electorate mp, why would they help me?
Um, but you know, the flip side of that, I've spoken
to a lot of electorate, mps, you know, around the place,
and all of them have without failed, been like genuinely
and passionately concerned
and committed to supporting their constituents, right?
It's why you become an electorate mp.
Um, so constituents need support.
MPS and eco staff want to support constituents.
Um, but there is that disconnect
and there is just this kind
of large mental block in the way.
And so I think it's worth exploring something
that can reduce them, you know, just removing,
it's a small hurdle, but it's a hurdle.
And I think in these times, especially, we should make it
as easy as possible for constituents to engage
with their elected members.
Um, you know, it's not for a party, it's
for the parliament, and parliament is for everyone.
You know, our place is your place as the, you know,
in parliamentary engagement saying goes.
Um, so I'm just gonna wrap up there, uh, to the type
of questions or to let someone else talk.
But, um, thank you again for inviting me to appear
before you, uh, genuinely delightful to get
to submit on this piece of legislation
of all pieces of legislation.
Gilda, and thank you. Thank you. Uh, do you, any questions?
Yeah, no problem. Um, so your whole, um,
I'm a constituency MP and I have a constituency office
and I help constituents in a, in a very traditional way.
There's, my staff assist me with that.
There are other constituency mps who take a different view
of the world and see themselves as, um, you know,
simply political activists
and don't really, uh, do the kind of helping people
with housing and a CC and that sort of stuff at all.
That's their choice, right? Immigration.
Um, and they choose to, they, they're elected
to this house on the back of that platform.
Um, and if the people
who elected them don't like it, they can vote them out.
Your whole argument is premised on a, a particular view of
what a constituency MP ought to do that is
at best convention.
Um, and arguably just kind of a habit.
Um, do you wanna respond to that observation?
I mean, I
can't make mps do their job better, like I think No, no.
But you're missing the point that if this is one
of the later No, but can I, no, no, no.
Uh, well,
at the very least, this would make it easier
for the electorate community office staff to do the job
that they are employed to do.
I've read the eco, um, staff description
and it is very heavily on engaging with the community
and dealing with constituent issues.
And, um, I can't speak
for their particular members if that member does not choose
to support their constituents who
did or did not vote for them.
Um, I'm not sure if that's sort of answering your question.
Good, Andy? Yeah. Look, uh, thanks Dave.
Two questions for can mm-Hmm. The first one of 'em, um, you,
it's the two right at the beginning.
Yeah. First one of 'em was, uh, you think worked. Yes.
We all worked very hard. Mm-Hmm.
Um, question is though, could we get more out
of ourselves in the sense if the parliamentary system was
more efficient and effective, uh,
rather than the, the way it actually runs?
Did you, have you given any thought to that?
I don't necess i With maybe some
sort of judicious changes to the standing orders, whatever.
You could maybe gain some small,
small efficiencies margin Sure.
At the margins, but ultimately, um,
maybe not this bill specifically,
but legislation now gets thousands of, thousands
of submissions on most pieces of legislation, right?
Maybe not most, but there are, you know,
regularly large items of business that are just in a way now
that you have not seen, uh, historically.
I know that the, uh, the numbers are out there.
Uh, I don't have them to hand.
Uh, I'm sure the, um, officials can provide you
with the research, um, around the numbers of, uh,
sort of submissions
and their level of engagement
that select committees especially are dealing
with at the moment, um, in ways that historically haven't.
And sort of no matter how,
how much more efficient you make the system,
I just don't think you can get around the fact
that you'll have to have, you know, dozens if not hundreds
of hours of committee hearings to hear everyone who wants
to make a submission on a bill.
Such, like the fast track approvals bill
or the treaty principles bill especially, um,
no efficiency is gonna change the fact that you had
to have hundreds of hours of submissions, which required
numerous MPS split committees, you know, um, subcommittees
with mps just spending hours and hours and hours
and staff spending hours and hours, hours
and those hearings, um,
taking away time from all other work that those members could be doing.
Thanks. And the, the other thing was, um, you mentioned, uh,
support for the, for a parliamentary budget office.
Can you just sort of expand on
what your thinking is around that?
I'm being led by my learned colleagues.
I think it's sensible. It makes sense to have, um, scrutiny
of, um, you know,
campaign promises, um,
but just sort of more scrutiny of various budgets.
Um, I just, I think it's a good thing.
I will freely admit that it's not my sort of area
of expertise, but I think it's a good idea.
Thank you, Dave. We um, we gave time there.
Blame members. Thank you. Thank you. You blame?
Um, we've got Mary Amelia Brown. Yes. On Zoom,
Mary.
Okay.
Yeah, you can.
Amelia, welcome to the Parliament Bill Committee.
You've got, um, five minutes to talk to us.
K Parliament Committee. Thank you.
And,
um, um, I'm Mary Amelia of the Family Brown,
the creation of the Supreme Creator God, an essay
and Suey Juris have reached the age of majority
and of sound mind incompetent to testify.
Do hereby declare the
following, excuse me.
The following truths to be the best
of my knowledge and belief.
One, declarant is the divine Spirit in as men.
There was no proof to the contrary.
Two was born alive
on the geographic location, body known asi.
There is no proof to the
Declar given name is Amelia
and her family name is Brown.
There is no proof to contrary.
Four does not consent
to be in a New Zealand al citizen,
nor any citizen of any corporate body politic on Earth.
And as such is alien to the jurisdiction of UA New Zealand.
There is no proof to the contrary five
de fluent as always in peace
and honor as an city Mai Zealandia national,
whereas Diluent is not an enemy, belligerent, rebel,
or terrorist subject to the trading with the Enemy Act
of November 2nd, 1914, the Emergency Banking Relief Act
of March 9th, 1933, the Terrorism Suppression Act
of October 17th, 2002,
or any other public policy and
or statute of UA, New Zealand,
or its subsidiaries, subsidiary states,
possessions, or erritory.
There is no proof to the contrary.
Six, the current does not consent
to any express or implied contracts, trust
and dentures, trust instruments, agreements,
and or any agreements made either publicly
or privately with any natural or artificial person.
And hereby terminate, terminates all agreements
on the grounds that they were previous, previously signed
by Declarant under threat juries incompetence,
or without full disclosure.
Wherefore, declarant hereby declares all said, contracts
and Void Pro,
there is no proof to the contrary.
Declarant does not reside on any land lawfully seated
to alua, New Zealand or any territory possession thereof.
There is no proof to the contrary.
Eight Dec Declarant is not property of surety
for or joined with all caps, Mary Amelia Brown,
Mary Amelia, brown, lowercase, all capitals Brown,
Mary Amelia, lowercase Brown, Mary Amelia,
lowercase Mary, all capitals Brown, all capitals Brown,
lowercase Mary
or any derivation of
that name either in spelling or capita.
And when in public goes only by the name
Mary of the family Brown.
There is no proof to the contrary,
excuse me.
The de current acknowledges
and accepts the definitions relevant
to registered organizations then goods
under New Zealand law presented in the company's Act.
1993, the Incorporated Societies Act 1908, the
Trust Act 1957,
and the Personal Property Securities Act 1999.
The Declarant recognizes that under the Sales
of Goods Act 19 8 0 8 goods include movable items such
as animals and their unborn young.
The Personal Property Securities Act 1999 also categorizes
animals and their offspring as tangible goods subject
to ownership and security.
The declarant affirms that there is no proof to the contrary
concerning these definitions and cla definitions
and class classifications under New Zealand law.
Excuse me,
Mary Amelia, your five minutes is completed.
Thank you for making that submission.
Thank you. Thank you
Mr. Chair. Catherine
on Zoom up if you'd like to circle back to,
Uh, Catherine Es.
Yes. Okay.
Oh, they're not the same. No.
Something something a bit odd. They,
Catherine, have we got Catherine?
Hello? Um, I'm Catherine.
Yes. Hi Catherine.
Uh, this is the Parliament Bill Select Committee.
Uh, we have you for five minutes your time.
Uh, members have read your submission. Thank you.
Alright, well, um, uh, I've lost my voice a bit,
but I'll try to get through.
Um, I just wanted to say that I don't believe
that this is an omnibus bell in the defy nations
of an omnibus bell.
I think that the omnibus was supposed to be to make, uh,
small minor alterations,
but this seems to me to be a major constitutional shift.
And, uh, I think that it should not be rushed
through in an omnibus, um, legislation.
Uh, Jeffrey Palmer did write his letter
and he did say that there is not time
to look over the entirety of this bill.
The bill is extensive
and, um, I think that we don't have enough time to, uh,
evaluate the constitutional implications
of what you've got there.
So that's the first thing.
Number two, um, in, in 2003
when Robin Cook went to Westminster
and removed our right to petition
to the Westminster Parliament
and the right of appeal, we were promised
that we would've a Supreme Court with a constitutional basis
that we could file our cases at the Supreme Court.
And, uh, one of the great, um, uh, privileges
of our 1688 Bill of Rights is
that we are permitted to call parliamentarians
into the court when they're violating our 1688 Bill
of Rights and not, um, adhering to the, uh,
uh, the liberties of the subjects
and the limitations of the crown.
Uh, don't have much time to speak,
but I have put in a written submission.
Uh, but I think
that we always should have the right to go to the court.
We've been blocked access.
The Anglo-Saxon people
of New Zealand have been blocked access for decades
to the White Tribunal.
And now we are being blocked access to the courts.
We've been, uh, the, uh, uh, uh, uh, judge Cook, uh,
created the strike law
and the, uh, citizens have been trying to go to the courts
to defend their rights
and struck out, uh, some of us have tried
to enter the Waiting Tribunal
and we've been denied access to the Y Tribunal.
And, um, and now the, uh, parliament is trying to make a law
to deny us the right to call
ministers to the court.
Uh, so that is, uh, another thing
that I wanted to talk about.
Um, secondly, um, there we talk about the Treaty of W
continuously, but in fact in 1838,
there was a professional bill of parliament
for all those people that were of, most of us.
In fact, most of the south island was held
by German people,
and the upper North island was held by French people.
And both the French
and the Germans seeded
to England in 1838.
Based on it was dependent on the New Zealand natives
agreeing to that cessation.
Now, that cessation was based on that we would be governed
by Westminster Law for all times to come.
Not some kind of tick on the law, not some kind of un law,
but Westminster Law under our 1688 Bill of Rights.
And it seems to me that there's an attempt
to remove that from us.
Uh, uh, also, I would just quickly add that in
that 1838 professional bill we were promised our
lands and her
and the here were established
by John Ward over in Germany
when we were promised our Protestant, um,
protections against all other religions,
including the Catholic religion, the Torah religion,
the Islamic religion.
And our pro Protestant religion promises us, um,
freedom from cruel punishments, a freedom of speech,
uh, a freedom of, uh, forfeiture of person.
Uh, so, um, that's all I can get in.
Uh, I suppose, uh, does anybody have any questions?
Might have time for one question about it.
No members don't have any questions. Thank you for your
No, I'm sorry, but I think that, that, I'm sorry.
I think there should be a question.
Your time is completed, sir,
Just so that you've listened to me
and I think that I ought to be permitted
to have a question now. I said a lot of things.
No, um, no, it doesn't work.
Submission, thank you.
Okay. With another Zoom contribution from,
I don't know to say his name, John McDonald Barry,
I really wanna say, but it worried could be.
Let's ask it.
Kiara Audio working. Kiara John?
Yeah, Yeah.
Uh, welcome to the Parliament Bill Select committee ca Um,
can you tell me how to pronounce your surname
correctly? I don't that,
Uh, it's wari, it's asker Irish name.
Thank you very much. Well welcome to the committee.
We've read your submission
and uh, you have five minutes with us
All. Alright,
so I'm addressing sections 14
to 28 where your bill
is invoking the Bill of Rights 1688
and discussing parliamentary privilege.
Uh, so I don't think
that section of the Bill of Rights, um,
does not and apply to members of the executive council
and their actions as ministers.
Uh, the Bill of Rights 1688 was signed
after a hundred years
before in England that had at least one civil war.
At least one monarch had lost their head
and another monarch had abandoned the throne
and it was replaced by another monarch
and was effectively a coup.
So the agreement 1688 Bill
of Rights is an agreement to reestablish, um, the monarchy
and set up a constitutional document
that New Zealand has inherited.
Um, so in the wake of the persecution
of those times, they put protections in for freedom
of speech and freedom of debate, um,
and the importance of people in parliament
to question the authorities.
Um, which is good and something I support
because if decisions are made without criticism in a
situation where criticism is suppressed or critics
and dissident, persecuted,
governments are gonna make very bad decisions.
And I think we saw that during the Covid times.
What concerns me about this bill
and what you might be trying
to do is provide protections from accountability
to ministers and members of the executive committee.
Um, I don't think the Bill
of Rights 1688 entitles them to that.
In fact, ministers are only mentioned in the 1688 Bill
of Rights in the subjects of liberties
to be allowed section.
And I'll read out an excerpt from that.
Um, may it be declared
and enacted that all and singular the rights
and liberties asserted
and claimed in said declaration are true ancient
and indubitable rights
and liberties of the people of this kingdom
and so shall be esteemed, allowed a judged deemed
and taken to be and all and
and every the particulars are for said shall be firmly
and strictly held
and observed as they're expressed in the
said declaration.
And all offices and ministers
whatsoever shall serve their
and successes according to the same in all times to come.
So that's a commitment of both the Crown and all officers
and ministers of the government to uphold the Bill
of Rights 1688 for all time,
and them acknowledging that these are ancient, true
and indubitable rights and liberties.
So the Bill of Rights 1688 binds
ministers to that level of accountability for those rights,
um, petitioning parliament
and freedom of speech of protected.
But those causes in the Bill
of Rights 1688 don't specifically refer to ministers.
So presumably open to all people
and ministers wielding the power of the state.
Um, and that can be used for arbitrary
and abusive purposes as we have seen in the last four years.
Um, they should not be predict protected from accountability
and people questioning their, um, motives.
Referring to clause 18 here, um, questioning
or establishing the credibility, motive, intention
or good faith of any person, I think we
as people should be able to question that of ministers
and officers of the crown, um, in courts,
other tribunals or in other settings.
Um, and the rest of it is in the document that I've,
um, sent to your committee.
Thank you. There's just one minute left.
There's any questions, take it if no one has it.
Thanks John. Just a question about, I understand your point
of view that ministers and members
of the executive council shouldn't maintain parliamentary
privilege, but how do you separate out the fact
that they are, you know, physically one and the same?
They are mps as well
and how would you ever draw that distinction in the house
between what I mean ministers are only in the house by right
of being MPS in the first instance.
Well, it depends if they're addressing the house
as a minister on behalf of the minister
or they're addressing it as a representative of the people
of their constituency.
Yeah. So if they're addressing the house as the Minister
of Education and they're talking about education policy
and orders of the executive council affecting education,
then in that situation they're acting as a minister
and an officer of the state
and they're in a role
that's wielding the power of the state.
So they should be accountable.
If it's, uh, opposition MP representing their constituents
and criticizing the government,
then they should get parliamentary privilege.
But the minister is in their capacity.
They could potentially have some system
where they set aside their ministerial responsibilities for
that debate and are addressing parliament just as an mp,
as a representative, and not as a minister.
But if they're carrying the ministerial authority
and those ministerial powers
or acting in that capacity on Parliament grounds,
the debating chamber is not so much I'm concerned as,
but it might give insight into their motivations
and good faith as a minister, depending on
what they say in their capacity
as a minister when addressing parliament.
Thank you. I'll have to think about that. But thank you.
Thank you for your submission. Much appreciated.
Uh, now members we have,
well, um, thank you for your thoughtful submission.
Much appreciated. Hope the studies are going well.
Um, and you have five minutes, uh, we've read your,
um, your submission.
Lovely. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thanks for having me on.
What I've seen as a very busy day in Parliament, um,
as you'll have seen from my submission,
it is relatively simple.
Um, I just wanted to voice my support for the, um, change
to the funding mechanism in part eight of the bill.
Um, I think it's really valuable to provide, uh,
parliament control of, um, the funding for Office
of the Clark and Parliamentary services, um, on,
you know, constitutional principle, um,
but also, you know, just so that um,
they can get more funding.
'cause I think they do a very valuable job,
particularly Officer Clark who I've hope, um, spent, um,
considerable time talking to
and talking about with members of Parliament.
Um, I'm happy to take my submission as read,
answer any questions you might have.
Um, but yeah, just wanted to submit, uh, my, my support
for this, for this bill.
Thank you. Very good. And then questions?
Not really. I mean it's just I think you might be a bit too
clever for us, me asking you questions.
Yeah. Um, how did those, uh, interviews actually go
with the former members and current members?
Very, very well. Um, a lot of it is anonymous, so I can't,
you know, say who, but they were
very interesting, very forthcoming.
Um, and I got a lot of, um,
really valuable information from, from members both former
and current, um, which was very appreciative
of if anyone else wants to, um, join in, in the research.
You are, you are welcome to.
I've got one if you want chair. Yeah, thanks Chair.
Will, I had a question around your section on, um,
independence of the legislature.
Is there anything not in the bill
that you would recommend including to strengthen that?
That's a good question. Thank you.
Um, so I'm not, I'm not sure what's in scope in terms
of like the legislative side of things.
One thing that I very strongly support is the use
of independent advisors at select committee.
I know this isn't, you know, something that needs
to be done via legislation, but I think,
and from having spoken to members,
they're a very underutilized resource.
Um, and they could provide a lot of,
the executive has all of bureaucracy, right?
It's got all of the government departments, agencies,
it's got a lot of people advising it, doing work for it.
The only parliament on the other side has very few people,
um, comparatively speaking, working for it.
And so when committees are relying on bureaucracy,
the departmental officials for substantive advice on, um,
bills, I think that that is, um, a potential concern.
And the use of independent advisors can counteract that,
provide, um, a, you know, a subject matter specialist
who can look into what a departmental officials are saying
and, and provide some counterbalance into that.
I know there's funding issues associated with that,
which is one of the reasons why I support this bill.
Um, more parliamentary control over the funding
for the office of the Clark would enable more independent
advisors without bankrupting of the office.
Thanks. So I know we're short on time,
but I wanted to have a follow up.
It's, um, it's interesting you you mentioned that
'cause, so Jeffrey Palmer also raised the issue
of resourcing and, uh, the workload of mps.
So if you saw his submission, he essentially made the case
that there are too few mps and they're too busy.
And, um, you made the, the, the comment at the start
that it's a busy day in Parliament
and I think we managed to eat today.
So that must have been, um, not as busy as you thought,
but do you have any views on that issue
around whether mps are adequately resourced
to do the scrutiny job that they are required to do
Mr. Breakfast? Completely.
I I don't think they're, um, from having talks to nmps
through my research, like, um, you know,
like you're incredibly busy, you're incredibly busy.
People, you, you are working hours are, um,
some would say inhumane, um,
and Parliament itself, you know, the,
the support the opposition has, um, to scrutinize
the, the government and government members themselves
who are not, um, in the executive is, is, is
such small amounts compared to what the executive has.
Um, so I think Parliament does need more funding.
Um, mps need more support.
Um, whether that is, you know, people, um, advisors
or that's, um, committees having subject matter specialists,
um, who are able to advise.
I, I don't know what that would
specifically look like at this time.
Um, but I, yeah, very much support, more resourcing
for Parliament as an institution.
Um, we've got one last question from, uh, Lawrence. Thank
You. Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
Uh, just a question around,
when you're talking about current, the underfunding
of the office of the Clark, now, there are two parts to it.
Number one is that there are underfunded
and the n didn't meet the cost, the rise of inflation.
The other part is you mentioned in terms of the workload,
and we have seen that their workload has increased,
for example, um, currently
because of the number of bills that's going through.
And also in terms of the extra,
like you said, the select committee work.
I wondered if in terms of the, the, the funding,
but you also see another part of it as putting thresholds
or limits in terms of the actual hours
for the staff as well.
And this is something that we have mentioned that
with the truncated select committee process,
we're seeing more and more select committees doing more work
outside of what is the normal number
of like the normal allocated hours. Mm-Hmm.
Yeah. And from talking to staff,
like they put in those extra hours, they work overtime,
they work weekends, they work late nights
because they so deeply care about the legislature,
the parliament as an institution, the value
that select committees add to,
um, to our democracy.
Um, and in some ways the overworking of them is,
is kind of taking advantage of that, that desire
to support the institution.
And so yeah, more staff for the office, um,
more people doing the work that is currently, um, put on
Too much work on too few shoulders.
Thank you. Well much appreciated. Very good. Very good.
Thanks. Well, thank you. Thank you.
So we now have, uh, Rick Landy by Zoom.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon.
Uh, welcome to the Parliament Bill Select committee.
We've got you for five minutes. Thank you.
Thank you. I'm concerned in sub part one, clause 10,
the purposes of repealing
and changing the law Attorney General versus Lee
and Buchanan versus Jennings,
who then will have accountability
and who will be accountable if you extend the privilege
for the MPS over to your staff.
Section 30, the house cannot expel a member.
Why not Section 58?
I'd like you to stop all payments
and travel expenses for previous ministers in their family.
It's a WR and it is the only job in New Zealand
where you get paid long after you've left.
How many painters get paid from their bosses who just go,
oh yeah, look, we've got this authority
and we are gonna give you some money.
You've left the job, deal with it.
You're on six figure salaries.
And if you haven't made provision, then
that's not our outlook.
I find it absolutely offensive that our money is being used.
And the man said earlier, the previous man said,
you are underfunded under, under supported.
Then, you know, you stop that sucking on the public tit
of previous people.
You would have enough money to hire people
to sort your lives out there
and make Parliament run even more smoothly.
Section 65 outlines what electioneering is.
I look forward to the M Marai report
and the sticky fingers
of everybody involved in the alleged misuse
of census material.
I'm glad it's been spelt out.
It needs to be made much clearer
and there needs to be penalties written in
section 68 and 69.
You need to cap travel allowances for mps not in government.
Like I said, it's a wrought.
I know you're never gonna do it
because you like the gravy train too,
and you can't wait till you retire.
Debbie Packer has spent 49,000
K on travel.
She's not even a minister. She's not even a minister.
You are our elected representatives.
The coalition, I don't mind funding your travel,
but certainly not for people who've long left.
And at section 70, the room remuneration authority has the,
um, now under section 70 to cap
your MP's pay.
I know you're not gonna, but I'd like
to see you get a small stipend
and have the rest performance based.
71. The remuneration authority needs to cap travel
section 72.
The PM Their travel needs to be capped at a hundred a year.
The previous Prime Minister should have none.
You were the prime minister. Well done. Now move on.
Why are you still paying people? They're working.
It is a privilege and it is out of date.
There's been petitions about it,
but of course none of are gonna listen.
Section 74 is a wishlist
and a blank for the remuneration authority.
Section 74 F protects them from personal liability.
Section 83 gives permanent authority to keep paying money
to people no longer in the beehive,
not on part five.
Uh, section 1 0 4, the clerk needs Minister of finance
approval to borrow or lend money, give guarantee in
or guarantee indemnity issue a public security
or enter into a derivative.
Let's play in the stock market, cut it out.
The clerk can delegate under section 1 0 5,
any employee of the public service.
So not the person that's got the job
and not the person that was voted in
or has the confidence of the minister.
They can delegate it. No thank you.
Section 1 1 2 says you're not an instrument of the crown.
So who's in charge? Who guards the guards?
Parliament pays for it.
And, uh, the hundred 19, the office
of the clerk is a public entity.
And, um, section 30, nothing will limit the power
of the Attorney General has been changed
to any minister of the Crown.
So the previous powers that were investors, uh,
there's a bit under section 85 in part five, uh, section 85
where the speaker determines travel accommodation,
the running of parliament,
the man can't even enforce the dress code.
We've got people with terrorist tee towels.
We've got men in skirts
who look like they've just come out of the second hand shop.
He can't even enforce the dress code
and he's in charge of all that stuff.
Brownley needs to resign, repeal all that
because it's just a money gravy train for you.
Sno Ghosts. Thank you, James. I have high hopes for you.
The rest of you, you need to apologize.
Duncan Weby disgusting terrorist words. Goodbye.
That's enough. Come on. Anyway, she's gone.
Yeah, she's, she's she like you Duncan.
Oh, relationship going there. You've got friends like that.
This is being broadcast live, so
on the public domain.
Okay, just take a breath.
I'm sure the next presentor will be wonderful.
Dr. Dean Knight.
Make us get the standing.
I follow that one. Let's see what you can do.
Public environment Kia Coto.
Um, I'm grateful for the opportunity to speak
to the committee and, um, my submission
and comments are, it's not brief, perhaps unusually so,
but first and foremost, I just want to put on record
that I'm a really big fan of this bill.
This is an overdue exercise in, uh, constitution shaping
and constitutional housekeeping.
You know, the collecting up of, uh,
and framing of some of our most important provisions
regulating the operation of parliament.
And it goes without saying, uh, that,
that pro promotes transparency, coherence,
and helps with, uh, civic literacy.
Uh, uh, secondly,
by expressing parliament's independent status as a, uh,
legis, uh, legislature separate from the other branch
of government that is, uh, precious, especially
as it relates to funding and security too.
And I think we saw this, the potential dangers
of executive control
of parliamentary agencies budgets earlier this year.
And at the time, I think I went on record expressing
concerns about the bodies that were supporting mps, uh,
ho um, holding the government to account
and scrutinizing legislation being subject
to executive control of their budgets.
So I applaud the, uh, protection of funding
and the assertion of, uh, independence
by the the legislature.
Two main suggestions I would add.
Um, the first is I suggest a cross reference
to the Constitution Act 1986.
Um, that would add a little bit more shape
to our partial sketch of our,
our Constitution, that important act.
But also, I think it's the right place for the recognition
of the operation of Parliament, uh, to be recognized.
Whether that's a cross-reference or,
or perhaps, you know, some
of the most important provisions could
be, could be put in there.
I'm, I'm pretty relaxed on.
Um, but for me, in principle, um, that idea
of cross-referencing from the Constitution Act to
what are our instruments, which are fsi constitutional
and some of our most precious is probably the most
productive way of further building our Constitution.
Um, increment incrementally, um, uh, and,
and with reflection rather than a, a, a a a,
an attempt at a big, uh, rewrite.
And I've gave, given you some of the language
that might be used there.
I've also got a technical point about parliamentary
privilege as it relates to proceedings with declarations,
inconsistency under the Bill of Rights.
I don't propose to speak that as quite a technical one,
but I think it's one that requires some, uh,
further reflection to make sure that the courts, uh,
have the opportunity to, uh, take heed
of the deliberations in the house as they relate to the,
the balances, uh, that are made under the Bill
of Rights Act, uh,
or the balances between the public interest and,
and individual rights.
If I could be add, um, be forgiven
for adding one third suggestion just sitting in here on the
committee, I wonder if something this bill needs is
provisioned for periodic review,
because there is many, there are many suggestions here,
which I, I've been drawn by.
I I'm not sure they'll find the,
their way into the bill necessarily,
but I do wonder whether, um, that this,
uh, review of this bill may be sequenced
or timetabled in conjunction with, say, the review
of standing orders, maybe every al alternate, um, term
of parliament to ensure that those suggestions,
which didn't find the day this time, are reflected on,
and that we can keep this important constitutional
legislation as sharp as it needs to be.
And if you think that actually trying to tie
that standing orders processes, that might be a,
a appropriate vehicle to make sure this very, very cons, uh,
important constitutional document is, is fresh
and, uh, responsive to the changing circumstances.
Do you mind if we have a question while you're speaking?
We, we've got you for a bit longer than the others.
Oh, no, I was gonna say finish means
finish and I can ask at end.
Yeah. Okay. That, that was all I had to say.
I'm happy to take questions. You wanna ask question? Yes.
Thank you for coming. Um, I
Would actually like to, uh,
see if you wouldn't mind expanding on your second
recommendation, particularly when it comes
to declaration of Inconsistency.
Um, because some, my understanding, so, you know,
when it comes to the, the BO
and Declaration of Inconsistency,
particularly from the Supreme Court,
and we're seeing a few instances of that, it's one
of the ways that the judiciary is able to provide
that checks and balances on both the
executive and the legislature.
But right now, we don't really have the same level of,
it doesn't really go through the same level of scrutiny
because although now the Declaration of inconsistencies,
they're debatable Yeah.
In the house, but it's not like other jurisdictions
where the judiciary is able to overturn a particular law
because of inconsistency with Bora.
So what is your recommendation here, I guess
in, in the sense of addressing that, that tension between
how the Declaration of Inconsistency works
and how parliamentary supremacy works?
Now, I, I think I, it was a privileges committee
that heard the, um, what I call the parliamentary sequel
to a, to a declaration and consistency
and a big supporter of that.
And for that to be institutionalized.
And, and, and that's something we want
to keep an eye on too, to make sure it's working as well as,
uh, it can be.
I'm addressing what happens
when Parliament is considering applications for declarations
of consistency from people where they may arise independent
of, uh, uh, uh, the interpretation of legislation.
Parliament's going to, uh, grade your homework
and assess whether they think that the, um, uh,
legislation unjustifiably, um, uh,
breaches the Bill of Rights.
What parliamentary privileges does is it doesn't allow the
Parliament necessarily for access
to the workings for your homework.
The deliberations in the house, the, the, the Court
of Appeal in the, in the Taylor case said it, it,
it's not a situation of impeaching parliament when you refer
to some of the basic material about the, uh,
the way in which a law, uh, goes, a bill goes
through the house, uh, I think it's to your advantage
to have, uh, to more readily sheer
and for the courts have access to the deliberations, uh, uh,
in the house to get a better sense of, uh,
how Parliament has made the choices that,
that are manifest in a bill.
Just a follow up question from that, um,
I really appreciate, but I guess the question when you're
saying have access to that from the judiciary is this goes
beyond what is already available in handout
and also recordings for select committee
and the House? Is that what you're
Well, the, the defect of the,
the Parliamentary Privileges Act is it prevents some of the,
um, uh, material
and the debates in parliament to be, uh, presented
to the court because that would be
questioning the proceedings of the house.
Uh, and, and,
and I'm, uh, there's, there's, how do I put it?
Um, the, the, the Court of Appeals said, as I say,
that you can look at some
of the proceedings in the house without impeaching, uh,
parliament, but did signal
that going very much further than referring to the basic way
that the, the, the bill went through the house
would be objectionable
and would be unlawful under the
Parliamentary Privileges Act.
There's some different views about whether that's good law
and so forth, and there's practices abroad.
I don't wanna get into the jurisprudence of that.
I think clarity here in saying if a declaration
of inconsistency, uh, is, uh, proceeds, uh, to parliament,
I think it's the rules regarding what parliament, uh,
the courts should look at,
should mirror the rules regulating what parliament, uh,
the courts can look at when, uh, facing a question
of legal interpretation.
So this is, it's quite a technical point,
but I think it's important one to make sure that
that parliament's deliberation about bills is adequately
available to, and can be considered by the courts. So,
Sorry, just getting one last for clarification on this.
So are you saying that at this stage when, um, uh,
application of a declaration of inconsistencies is in front
of the court and the court, the judges can go
and have a look at the hand item and all of the, but
however they can do that,
but cannot reference it, they can't 'cause it's inadmissible
because of parliamentary privilege
Act? That's right. There's,
yeah, the exact boundaries of
that are set in the, in the, in the title case.
Uh, and as I say, I think,
I think it's been set in a place which may,
that troubles me, if like it to be more generous.
Good to James. I'm, I'm gonna offer a contrary view.
I think you should probably strengthen
that having sat in the house, uh, at times
and listened to contributions
that make it into the hand side.
I think potentially looking at those for the source
of inspiration, for the intention of a bill
might be fraught, but I'll leave that for another day.
Um, I wanted to ask two very quick questions.
One is on your, your idea of repair review.
I think it's an interesting one. Do you, do you think
that should be in statute
or should it should form part
of the standing orders of department?
I'm agnostic. Uh, and,
and I mean, there's provision for
the Standing Orders committee to conduct the reviews.
I don't think it specifies how often, but,
but there seems to be a customer that's done every term.
You know, I i it could be parasitic on that.
It could be in the statute. I'm a big fan of, uh,
well generally for legislation
to be re-reviewed periodically, um,
I think both would work.
Okay, fair enough. And the second question is, it goes back
to the previous submission, um, from John who talked about m
ministers not being subject to parliamentary privilege.
Do you think that could even, could it, could that work?
Could you ever find a way
where you distinguish between the two?
Or is the fact that ministers are only in the house
by virtue of being mps and there's various hats
and it's just not a workable compromise?
It's it's a tricky one.
And, and, and, and to be honest, I haven't,
I haven't thought through that one at all.
And I, and, and, um, I'm not sure I can can offer it,
but I know it's, it's a difficult one to, to,
to draw the balance because of the, the,
the ministers are drawn from the house, that's part
of our constitutional arrangement.
They, they wear both those hats.
And I know that when these things have, um, come through in,
in, in cases dealing with, uh, those, uh,
parliamentary privilege
and the courts have had to express views on,
on which ones are, which hats
they're wearing, it's not an easy task.
Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. Thanks, Mr. And good Dean.
Good to see you. Um, I was just interested,
we've had quite a number of, um, people submitting, uh,
talking about the OIA and application to Parliament.
I just wanted, if you could give any guidance as
to we think, uh, we should go and where we shouldn't go.
I, um, it perhaps goes without saying I support
transparency, um,
but transparency that's got to be appropriately defined
because there are some dealings of mps in relation
to constituents and political matters that are really,
uh, would be challenging to,
to address within the current re regime.
But in principle, I support the idea that there is provision
for freedom information relating to the, um,
the operation of Parliament.
Uh, but here is where I might differ.
I think it's for parliament to instigate a regime
to deliver on that because of its independence.
If you go back to my point about this bill is really
exciting because it is Parliament asserting its own
independence from other branches of government.
For me, uh, um, uh, access
to information regime would be better built into the
processes of Parliament that might be costly
and may require some, um, extra roles and things like that.
And, and inevitably it would probably reflect
and echo the established jurisprudence and the, and the ways
and the, uh, official information act.
But for me, it's a matter for parliament to regulate.
And I, I, I'm, I'm, I'd be, I'd be nervous in, in,
in crossing that boundary, um, there,
but in principle, you say Parliament should
not bind itself by law.
No, no, no. I think, I, I don't think that the,
the Parliament should be exposing it itself to, um,
external oversight in this.
I think it's, you know, it's, it's a matter
of privilege in some respects, you know, uh,
and you could see, you could see a, um, an independent, um,
uh, person chosen by Parliament to deliver on
that, particularly.
So, you know, I, and, and, um,
and I think it probably would need
regimes which reflect the, the nature
and the operation of parliament as opposed
to executive government and departments ing.
Yeah. Thank you. Put stuff on that question. Yeah. Okay.
I raised this last week.
Um, could, could a regime work where
more proactive disclosure of,
'cause a lot of this seems to be around, um, expenditure
and information that isn't necessarily to do
with the role of the mp.
Could more proactive, uh,
and detailed disclosure of, say, an MP's non-staff budget
or some of the other spending that happens in parliament,
meet those ends without having to go
through an OIA or similar type structure?
I, I, I think, I think all institutions,
the executive parliament should lean into, uh,
proactive disclosure.
You know, the, the, the, the, the, the on request A system
sets us sort of a, a baseline for people
to activate it case by case.
But fundamentally, you know,
our institutions should be built on ideas of transparency.
So, so provide that. The best way for that is
to systemize the, the proactive disclosure of, um, uh,
information in a meaningful way,
in a timely way, in a meaningful way.
And I've been a big fan of, of the proactive disclosure
by the executive, uh, my, my colleagues abroad are, uh,
envious of the access to cabinet papers
and departmental paper, uh, cabinet papers, especially
that we get, there's some fish hooks in, in the way
that the, some of the timing of availability
and the relationship with the IA has been gamed a little
bit, or not working as well as it should.
But proactive disclosure, you know, living
and breathing transparency is the important thing for me.
One more for me on that, sorry, I'm holding the time.
Any risks of a chilling effect on if, if,
if the regime was ever expanded to cover MPS
and their operations, any risks of
that having a chilling effect on how they go about their
duty and, and in essence, the constitutional role to be
somewhat independent and free to, to work in a way, um,
where if there was complete exposure
and complete transparency about communication
with constituents, they wouldn't be able to do that?
Well, I think you need to take care from, I, I'm not,
I'm not the technician on this.
And, and, and, and, um, I know others have referred
to regimes abroad, which, which would obviously play, uh,
um, give some templates.
But I think you've gotta take care with that
because I recognize the role of an MP is different
to a minister, is different to a,
you know, public servant as well.
Thank you. Are there any final questions? No, that's good.
Um, to do any final comments?
No, grateful for the opportunity. Thank you. Thank you, Don.
You question Thank, uh, we now are going
to hear from the New Zealand Council for Civil Liberty.
Then we're gonna have Andrew, um, saying
I, I, I, I'm back again.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.
Um, I'm substituting for the chair
of the Council for Civil Liberties.
I'm the deputy chair, but I was also the lead author
of our submission.
Um, just before I get into it,
and perhaps to the benefit of Mr.
Miga who wasn't here, when I spoke earlier,
I talked about resourcing a number of mps in Ireland
by account, by, by contrast to our situation.
I think one, and, and picking up on a point Mr. Foster made
earlier about how can you do this
through parliamentary efficiencies.
One of the things that I think mps might want
to think about is project management.
And it sounds very weird, but actually the bill going
through the house is a project.
Conducting an inquiry is a project.
You've got defined scope, you've got some outputs and so on.
And for every project,
there's what's called the Iron Laurel project,
which is you've got time, quality,
and cost of the attributes of a project.
Okay? What Jeffrey Palmer and what I,
and what, uh, other submitters have talked about is the
shortage of time as an attribute for MPS to do their work.
Well, the effect of squashing time inevitably is
that the quality suffers.
Okay? So if you want to keep the quality of scrutiny
and the quality of inquiries high, you have
to increase the amount of time
that obviously has effects on costs.
But that's the basic rule of, of getting pieces of business,
uh, through the house, uh, while maintaining the quality
that, uh, the New Zealand public would expect.
Um, I wanted to talk a little bit about the, the process
of this bill arriving in public.
Um, we would, the council was genuinely surprised,
uh, that there had been no public consultation on any
of the policy proposals in this bill.
There'd been no exposure draft,
even though the cabinet paper say
that an exposure draft was prepared
and was consulted on with a limited number of people.
Okay? And this doesn't just apply to the current government.
This bill was clearly developed in part
under the last government.
Um, neither part, neither government said,
uh, this is about reshaping our constitution.
As Dean said, this bill is about constitution
shaping, right?
And in a democracy,
parliament gets its legitimacy from the public,
and yet we are reshaping one
of our fundamental institutions.
And the public have not been consulted on any
of the development of this.
And the cabinet paper, one of the cabinet papers, even notes
that Treasury's regulatory impact assessment said, uh,
they have only minor impacts on businesses, individuals,
and not-for-profit entities when it comes
to parliamentary security officers.
Well, given that the bill effectively creates a new police
force with no independent oversight, um,
I don't actually think that counts
as a minor, uh, development.
So the prob the problem with the secrecy
around development of this is a, you get people like me
and many of the other submitters saying the OIA should be
subjected, should, should be extended to cover parliament.
Um, but we know, um,
particularly people who've been ministers in the past will
know that trying to get a major amendment
to a bill like this through a select committee
is an extremely uphill task.
Because effectively you're asking for changes
to policy proposals to go back to cabinet
for parliamentary council to redo the drafting,
and then for it to come back to the house.
It's, it's very unlikely to happen
that a select committee is gonna make such
major changes to a bill.
Um, and certainly trying
to make extent extend provisions like that, that a committee
as a whole, you're not really expecting
to have public submissions after the bill has been reported
back to the committee and goes
to second reading committee as the whole.
So there's real problems
with the process in which this policy
and this bill has been developed.
And we fundamentally think that it's
dangerous at a time when democracy is at risk.
I mean, the OECD has just held a global summit in Milan,
New Zealand didn't even send a minister
to this global summit on questions
about trust in democracy.
They are deeply concerned at the OECD about failing,
falling levels of public trust
and increasing authoritarianism.
It's not just the OECD, there's lots
of international institutions now commenting on Democratic
backsliding, um,
and New Zealand risks being complacent about this just
as we're complacent about our position
and the transparency International
Anti-corruption index every year.
So, um, on the OIA, you'll have seen from our submission
that we, that three major reviews have recommended
parliamentary agencies be brought within musco the act.
But this has also been recommended
by two former speakers, Mr.
Mallard and Margaret Wilson.
It's also, you can't count tweet. Sorry.
You can't count tweet though. Well, why not?
It's a public, it's on the record. Jesus.
If the, if the speaker is engaging in dialogue in a public
forum saying, if this comes to me while I'm a speaker,
I would endorse law Commission's previous recommendation.
Why shouldn't we take him out? His word? It's not like Mr.
Mallow isn't an experienced person
and doesn't know what he's saying in public.
I don't think Oliver's tweets would necessarily well
consider Well, that that's a different issue.
Um, uh, and people's question, you know,
judgment about the former speaker is,
is his different issue.
But, but I'd also point out that, you know,
former Attorney General Chris Fen was also said,
I think the OIA should apply to Parliament as well
as the former Prime Minister, Jeffrey Palmer and Peter Dunn.
So there's a wide range of people who have said this,
and the Law Commission has looked at this in great detail.
Um, I pointed out earlier that
how outta step New Zealand is re
regard to Commonwealth countries.
Uh, there's at least 24 other Commonwealth countries
where PA Parliament is covered by their OIA
and another 77 countries.
And it's important to look at the UK
because, like the UK no written Constitution
and taking on board Dean's point about
should Parliament govern itself.
The UK Parliament looked at this very carefully.
Should it regulate, draw up its own regulations on access
to information, or should it say we're gonna be covered
by freedom of information legislation?
And it opted in to be covered by freedom
of information legislation.
There are however, caveats, first of all, mps can relax.
You're not individually covered, okay?
Nobody's proposing that MPS should be individually covered.
It's the institutions of the house
that we're talking about covering here.
And, uh, in, if you were to go for the uk Parliament's one,
the Clark, uh, sorry, the Clark, the Speaker
of the House can issue a conclusive certificate that says,
no, this is a matter of privilege
and takes it outside the scope
of any independent oversight of complaints.
Okay? So there are lots
of ways in which you can navigate this position.
And when Dean said, well, parliament would want
to have an independent person overseeing any disputes about
access to information, parliament already employs its own
parliamentary ombudsman to do this for the rest of the OIA.
There's a huge body of expertise in that institution.
So, to give one example about why do people want
to see this, not just about MPS expenses, which frankly
to me is not as important,
actually what's far more important is about
how much are you spending on the building?
What's going on in terms of budget bids
for revamping the website?
How much is being spent on providing you
with independent support for select committees.
But equally, uh, there are important issues like,
um, what happened with the continuance in Office
of the Parliamentary Ombudsman earlier this year,
he resigned because he'd reached the statutory age limit.
Now, the House said, oh no, we've interpreted the law.
That means he can continue in office.
Now that interpretation of the law is opened to question
we wrote to the chair of the Office of Parliament Committee,
and we said there's public,
there's media reports saying you've had advice from the
clerk and, and, and so on.
We would like a copy of this.
We would also like to appear
before the Office of Parliament Committee
before you appoint the next onwards move.
'cause we've got concerns about
how the office has been running.
For example, if you have a single ombudsman,
how does it deal with things like conflicts
of interest, right?
Previously we had multiple ombudsman.
We have no rights
because there is no RAA to say to the speaker, provide us
with the advice that you use
to justify the continuance in office
of a man who's resigned from that office.
Right? So it's not just about things like expenses.
Um,
coming back to Mr.
Me's point about, uh, free
and frank advice, when the Law Commission looked at this,
not only did they draft some specific specific provisions
where you would carve out from the definition
of official information, certain kinds of information,
and those are listed in our written submission.
The Law Commission also said you would want
to amend Section nine two G one of the OIA,
which is about the provision of free and frank advice,
because that only refers to officials and ministers
because that's all the who the bill applies to.
If you're going to extend the bill to Parliament,
you would also want to have it for free
and frank exchange of views between mps
and offices of the house.
Okay? So the Law Commission looked at this in real detail.
It's not impossible to do.
Um, we'd also point out
that actually Parliament is already partially covered
by the OIA, uh, in the, um,
officer Clark Act 1988.
It weirdly provides that Parliament is covered by part four
of the OIA and the Ombudsman's
Enforcement provisions of those.
And what that does is give companies Incorporated bodies a
right to their personal information.
Now, so let's say you are a supplier to Parliament.
You get into a contract dispute
and you want to go, well, what's going on?
I can, I can effectively use Privacy Act rights if I'm a
company to get information from the house.
How many times has this been used?
I don't know because I have no RAA rights to ask the House.
How many times have people used those rights
and why has it been continued in Clause
120 of the current bill?
Um, we also recommend that the,
the bill amend the Privacy Act.
Uh, at the moment, the parliamentary service is partly
exempt from the Privacy Act
and the Ombudsman is exempt from the Privacy Act.
The Law Commission and its review
of the Privacy Act previously, uh, recommended
that the Orman's exemption from the Privacy Act be removed.
And yet, when the Privacy Act 2020 was
passed, that didn't happen.
We made an OIA request to Ministry of Justice.
It had no justification
for not implementing the Law Commission's recommendation.
We're left to draw our own conclusions about the Orman's
relationship with the Ministry of Justice,
and whether this was special pleading about workload,
if we're, if they were made subject.
Um, in terms of funding, we strongly support, uh,
the measures to improve the independence
of parliament's budgets.
We were deeply concerned earlier this year when it was
reported that the Minister
of Finance was seeking 6.5% budget cuts from the
parliamentary service in the office of the Clark.
Um, and New Zealand has long been outta step
with all the legislatures around the world
for not having greater control over the resources
it needs to do its job.
Um, so yes, it would strengthen independence.
However, we are concerned about the references
to the Officers of Parliament committee model for this,
because the Office
of Parliament committee MO model is problematic,
it doesn't invite public input into, say, the budget bids
of officers of Parliament like the Auditor General
or the Ombudsman.
So previously, for example,
the Ombudsman has told Parliament,
I don't need any extra resources for my OAA investigations,
but complainants to his office who are waiting a year
or two years for complaint to be investigated,
may have differing views
of whether the ombudsman should be given more resources
to do those investigations.
At the moment, there's no point in an Officer's
of Parliament's budget process for anybody outside
to make submissions on a draft budget.
Now you I just intervene there. Yeah.
You know, I, I'm, you might get
ordinary citizens having views on the funding
of various departments and services.
Yeah. But it isn't usual to have a kind
of public participation in a budget process
across government.
Is it? Well, it's interesting you say that.
So the very first witness in front of you this afternoon,
Derek Gill, who is New Zealand's reviewer
for the International Budget Partnership,
he talked about New Zealand falling down the open budget
index comparing other countries.
The reason we fall down is
because New Zealand does not as good
as other countries at enabling public
participation in budget processes.
We are great at publishing documentation,
we're great at the accountability end of the process.
We are not good, but the pre-approval process
enabling public input proposal,
a general point about our budget process, yeah, okay.
Right. But, but that's government overall.
What we are talking about here is how do you,
this is a bill which is about strengthening the,
the independence and legitimacy of our legislature.
And I'm suggesting that the committee ought to say,
the bill needs to require that there are, uh,
pre-budget hearings on what should go in the budget.
So, for example, uh, we've made, in our submission
to the standing orders review a couple of years ago,
the council made complaints
and recommendations about the quality of hand side
and video production on the website and so on.
And of course, that's massively affected
by the budget available if we wanted to make input
to Parliament and its budget proposals for
how does it improve its website or parliamentary engagement
or whatever it is, we've got no channel at the moment.
And the bill doesn't build in any safeguards
for a channel for that input.
I think it's a better, better funded parliament.
But I guess,
and I do see if I can say that one of the problems with,
with a, um, parliament voting its own budget
is public criticism, right?
That you're feeding, you know,
you're just feeding yourselves.
Um, and I guess one of the benefits
of the more public front end would be greater legitimacy
around the decision that's being made.
The concern I have is that
whilst your organization might want to see better hand
and better website and so on, um,
not all submitters are informed about what it costs
to run a parliament and what a good parliament looks like
as some of the submitters today pointed out.
Yeah, no, I, no, I agree.
I mean, I, you know, when I first came
to this country 20 years ago
to do my master's in public policy at Vic,
I think the leading news article was about the cost
of a new cabinet table.
And there was great hang ringing public about how, you know,
politicians were, you know, going soft by
spending much money on a cabinet table.
I go, I think they've still got God, you know, get over it,
you know, spend the money on the table if it's necessary
for cabinet to do its work, properly, do do the work.
I think, I think you, you raise a,
you raise a legitimate point, which is the,
the comfort levels of people going out
and justifying the level
of expenditure needed to run something.
But that's a problem that doesn't just affect parliament.
I mean, of course it affects mps more
because as you've heard from some of the other submitters,
they think you're lining your pockets
and you're having it very soft and cushy.
But it's a problem that also affects us in terms of quality
of info investment and infrastructure and whatever.
Anything else. We have a democracy, I think,
run on the cheap compared to other countries.
Now, I think one of the things that the committee ought
to consider doing is asking the parliamentary library
to provide it with comparative analysis of funding
for similar parliaments.
Okay? Get funding, get, get the parliamentary library
to provide you with analysis on what,
what's the spending on the parliamentary library in the
House of Commons in Westminster, for example,
what does the Irish Parliament do?
They've got good inter parliamentary links.
They could find this information for you,
and they could provide an
adequate briefing to the slick committee.
Um, related to about three minutes left. Sure, sure.
No, I've got a, I've got a time know,
and Lawrence, can I just ask one,
which is supplementary effectively to, to Duncans,
because I thought where he was going was, um, the sort
of pre-budget process.
You go, well, why would it only be a
pre-budget process for parliament?
You're talking about the entire operation of the government.
Yeah. Which would be interesting. I mean,
I'm familiar to that from a local government.
Sure. But, but that's ly nearly, yeah, no, I, I, I think
that's something that ought to be considered.
On the other hand, that's our scope
of this bill I'm talking about.
That's fine. Pre budget scrutiny for,
for, for parliamentary agencies.
But it does open it, uh, for political parties
to make submissions on every single thing, um, and,
and end up having five different, uh,
submissions from political parties.
I, I will be surprised promoting their particular policies.
Sure. But, but, but for example,
the green submission says we support retaining the
independence of the parliamentary librarian.
Right? I'm gonna extrapolate for that
and say they might want greater funding
for the parliamentary librarian.
I'd also support that council would support that.
I think it's highly unlikely that when you get
to the whatever process you get for the committee
to draw up a budget bid for Parliament, the idea
that you won't get each party putting in a submission
saying, we want this, have more funding
or less funding pie in the sky.
They're all gonna want to have an input
because they all care about the running of this house.
We'll go. Could I finish your thought? Because Yeah.
So I'll be very brief in terms of funding.
I think functions of the Clark, the functions
of the Clark section, um, I think you want
to make it an explicit function for, uh, the office
of the clerk to produce hands off
for all public proceedings.
We get 'em for the main chamber. We don't mostly get hands
off for committees like this.
And I think as a legislature,
you should be having hand side records
for all public proceedings.
It's what happens in many other legislatures.
I find it shocking that I can't go
and see a written transcript of
what Sir Jeffrey said last week.
Right. Um, yeah, we'll try and table it as well.
Well, you know, I can go and try
and have a look on the Vimeo website
and see if I can track it down
and then get somebody to, I mean, these days you can have
AI transcription of it, so the cost of it is coming down.
The second thing is the functions of the clock, I think,
think it should be an exp explicit function of the office
of the clerk in the bill
to provide independent advice to select committees.
Uh, the PhD candidate
who you heard from earlier, made that point.
This is something we made in our submission on standing
orders a couple of years ago.
And the reason for that is can be seen from two news
articles last year about select committees being extremely
unhappy with how departmental committees had ignored
what MPS on the committees wanted to do.
This happened on the three waters bill with DIA officials
not doing what the MPS wanted.
And it happened on the immigration Mass arrivals bill with,
again, MB officials producing report when the MPS on the
committee said, no, we do, we do not
want a departmental report.
You've got a fundamental conflict of interest
with government officials advising the legislature, right?
I'm not saying committees shouldn't be able to ask them
for advice on the technicalities of the bill,
but committees should not be dependent on government
officials for analysis of submissions and advice.
Um, the final thing is parliamentary security.
Um, we recommend that the whole
of part seven B withdrawn public consultation happen.
Uh, the ris, as was pointed out last week,
was drawn up in 2021 before the 2022 processes.
Uh, the not 2019 review of parliamentary security,
I don't think has been published.
And we have no right to it.
You are effectively creating a new police force,
but then you are saying the oversight
is provided by the speaker.
Well, the speaker himself is gonna be compromised
with all due respect because they may well have given the
orders to parliamentary security
get those people off our lawn.
Okay? We would suggest that if you're gonna
strengthen parliamentary security powers in this way,
they should be subject to independent oversight by ipca,
the Independent Police Conduct Authority.
You have independent oversight for the police,
you've got independent oversight for, uh, the SIS,
you've got independent oversight for other bodies.
Um, it's not a statutory duty on PSOs
to consider people's rights
to freedom expression association
and assembly before they act.
And this is really problematic when you're defining the
boundaries to also include parliamentary law
where protests arrive.
Okay? We would suggest that the jurisdiction
of parliamentary security officers is limited
to the buildings, the constituency officers.
And when select committees meet out off site,
don't think parliamentary security officers should apply
to the grounds outside parliament.
Anything accident, the building should be the police.
And we find it quite ridiculous that, uh, clause 169
of the bill empowers parliamentary security officers
to require people attending parliament
to produce evidence of their address.
Right? This is one of the things
that happens if you copy over provisions from the Court
Security Act and so on, you just hold a bowl of sale.
Well, we'll take those powers over.
Why should a parliamentary security officer have the power
to say to me, provide me with proof of your address,
or You can't go in and talk to that select committee, right?
Or even enter the parliamentary grounds,
because that's the, that's the jurisdiction
that's being proposed here.
Are you really talking about having parliamentary security
saying, provide me with proof of your address
before you're allowed to enter the parliamentary ground?
So there's real problems with part seven of the bill.
We've just, you know, highlighted some of them.
I think this is the reason why you should take it out.
And there should be public consultation in this.
I mean, I even provided advice to somebody in early 2022
who was seeking to have a Petition
to Parliament saying there should be public input on any
review of parliamentary security following the protest.
And the petition, petition office rejected that petition
because they said, no, no, we're not conducting any review.
There is no official review. It's being done by ico. Okay.
So people have asked for public input
before these proposals were developed,
and that didn't happen.
We have a question from, I think, run out time.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. We have.
I if, if, if members have any questions
and they want us to provide any further written advice,
please contact us.
I'm happy to send you further written submission.
Thank you very much for time. Thank.